---
title: Build a custom player
nav_order: 50
layout: home
parent: Replaying races
grand_parent: Racing
has_children: false

---

# Building your own race-player

The process of [(re-)playing a race](../replaying) is (deliberately) separate
from the race server (although there's a built-in race player, you can use your
own if your prefer). This page describes how to go about creating your own. It
probably should run in a browser (e.g., a JavaScript or WASM application),
because that's how your students are likely to be accessing it.

{: .note}
_"Player" versus "runner"_:  
Remember the **race player** is the software you use to _replay_ a race-file
that has events and results that were generated by a [race runner](../running),
which is a standalone application that calculates the outcome (events and
results) of a race.

{: .todo}
This page is incomplete, and is currently being written! (6-Dec-2023)

## Summary: inputs/process/output

### Inputs

There are effectively three inputs for the race player:

* **race file**  
  The race file should contain the _results_ (per buggy) and the _events_ of
  the race (you can assume that the events describe a race that yields the
  results that are described within it). The race player is primarily concerned
  with displaying those events (presumably as an animation of the race
  as it progresses).  
  
* **racetrack background image URL**  
  This is a cosmetic depiction of the racetrack as a 2:1 (landscape) aspect
  ratio image (typically JPEG).
  
* **racetrack path SVG path URL**  
  This describes the racetrack as an SVG path. If overlayed on the background
  image, the path describes the route followed by buggies driving along the
  racetrack. _Racetrack paths must always be loops._


{: .note}
If you are also [building your own race-runner](../custom-runner) then you can
put anything you want in the race file for your customn race-player to consume.
You need to keep the parts that the race-server uses intact (the buggies'
`position` for example is used when uploading results), but any new fields will
be ignored. The server does not inspect anything in the `events` object.

## Process

The race player should display the progress of a race — the built-in one uses
animation applied to SVG elements to do this, and supports pausing, tracking
(highlighting) individual buggies, speeding up (in case the race gets slow due
to everyone running on punctured tyres, and so on).

## Output

The race player doesn't provide any output — only the display. The results don't
need to be displayed either, because those are already tabulated on the race
server (although if you want to add a results display too... feel free).

## Alternatives to a programmed race-player

The race-player is really just displaying, in animated form, a replay of the
race. An extreme customisation of the race-runner could result in these replays
being in other formats entirely, such as video — in which case you don't need
to implement a race-player like this at all. That's a significant customisation
to do, but is mentioned here so you can appreciate that the way the default
race-player is implemented isn't necessarily the only approach to take.

