---
title: About the students
layout: home
parent: Teaching
has_children: false
nav_order: 10
---


# About the students

We designed this project so it would be suitable for students who are at least
familiar with the core concepts of Python. But we don't expect them to have
used a webserver like Flask before, or made calls (in this case SQL) to an
external service, or to have done any web development.

_However_ we also anticipated that it's increasingly common for _some_ students
in any given cohort to have considerable experience in some or all of these
things.

That's why we design the [tasks and phases](tasks-and-phases) to be very
flexible. It's possible to offer a project that will encourage new programmers
to make genuine progress building a thing that works, whilst also challenging
more experienced developers to dive deeper.

Incidentally, web dev is great for this, because it applies so readily to
examples in the online world with which students are already familiar... and
almost every aspect of it affords fractal investigation. _Just getting
it to work_ is a viable target for a new programmer. But getting it to work
securely with good UX design and accessibility concerns, not so easy. What
about internationalisation? Left-to-right languages? And so on :-)


{: .rhul}
The Buggy Racing project was specifically for the Foundation students within
the Computer Science department. This invites an especially wide range of
experience â€” ranging from students with no programming exposure outside
introductory classes, through to competent web developers, possibly with
industrial experience, who might be on the course because they don't have
A-level maths. The project accomodates this range of ability by letting the
students themselves decide how _thoroughly_ they implement each task.
